doc/rdm: RFC - design goals (#10162)
RIOT-OS/RIOT: doc/memos/rdm-draft-petry-riot-design-goals.md

>  - RDM: 1

Reviewer: as per RDM0 this should be changed to "rdm-draft-petry-riot-design-goals.md" for now ;)

Author: done

Author: changed back

 - Title: RIOT design goals
 - Author: Daniel Petry  
 - Date: October 2018

## Abstract

This memo describes RIOT's high level design goals. The aim is to reflect
community consensus on these goals and thereby guide technical discussion around
specific contributions.

## Status

> This document is a product of the community of RIOT maintainers, and aims to 

Reviewer: Since the document is not a consensus document yet, the first sentence should be remove for now (added when/if the document is about to be published and assigned an RDM number etc.)

Reviewer: @danpetry can you modify asap to disambiguate?

represent the consensus within this community. The content of this document is
licensed with a Creative Commons CC-BY-SA license.

## Introduction

The primary aim of this document is to guide lower level debate and discussion.
The problems that aim to be solved are that design priorities are currently:

- Expressed as a list of points in the README.md and RIOT vision, without
  expanding on any of them individually, which gives little understanding of
  each point
- The design priorities are expressed as equals in those documents, making it
  difficult to make design decisions around them where there are tradeoffs
- Not captured in a place which explicitly focuses on users, which means that
  they don't foster an intuition of user needs, and therefore of how to make
  design decisions which lead to RIOT being a widely used product.
- Otherwise communicated via word-of-mouth, which is inefficient and leads to
  corruption of information

> - Percieved differently by different people.

Reviewer 2: Perc**ei**ved

In other words, this document aims to increase alignment and visibility of
information on RIOT's design goals, and to increase their focus on users.

This information is illustrated via several angles:

1. A short mission statement, suitable to gather a 30 second impression of the
   operating system on a technical level, which can also be re-used in public
   documents
2. A series of example use cases
3. A series of specific design philosophies.

# 1. Mission Statement

RIOT is an open-source operating system which makes it easy to deploy sensor and
actuator networks with challenging resource requirements that can operate for
years without physical intervention.

It is designed to abstract away the hardware details of remote and low-access
sensor and actuator nodes. An identical programming interface is presented

> across heterogeneous nodes, supporting underlying hardware out-of-the-box, with

Reviewer 3: yes, and to me the lack of any vendor lock-in is very important.

a short learning curve. Those nodes are often highly constrained in power and
memory and failures cannot be tolerated due to their isolation, and the
operating system is designed to handle these constraints with fault-free long

> term operation. The protocols used to communicate with them are at the leading

Reviewer 2: Maybe split this (those nodes...long term operation) sentence into two. Feel free to ignore

> edge of innovation in constrained and mesh networking, to ensure data is

Reviewer 3: Well, some standards we support have been followed and influenced by core members of the community, and the first implementations are often based on drafts. Doesn't that count as leading edge? What would?

> edge of innovation in constrained and mesh networking, to ensure data is

Reviewer 4: I cannot remember of any example (except the ICN case) where we have been the leading edge in bringing new protocols to the IoT. Conversely, in some cases like CoAP we have been rather late. However, I don't think that it is a key design objective to be the first who implements. Rather, quality and timeliness seem the relevant focus points here.

> edge of innovation in constrained and mesh networking, to ensure data is

Reviewer 5: +1 quality and timeliness should be the focus.

That some RIOTers are involved in the IETF is nice but cannot be applied to the whole RIOT community.

> edge of innovation in constrained and mesh networking, to ensure data is

Reviewer 4: Mhmm, again I believe this relates to the situation of interoperability and standards. Looking at the core IPv6, I don't think any IoT node really needs to implement path-MTU discovery - interoperability works without. But a node MUST implement 6Low fragmentation, if it wants to support the corresponding links. Conversely, it need not implement 6Low fragmentation if it only supports NB-IOT links ...

Its probably more a question of paraphrasing: If an implementation lacks features that are essential for interoperability, we cannot claim more than a "partial implementation". If we claim implementation of a protocol, then it must be interoperable as defined in the standards.

> edge of innovation in constrained and mesh networking, to ensure data is

Reviewer 2: @tcschmidt I think we agree here, just wanted to emphasize that the "quality" as mentioned above doesn't imply that we must implement all the "SHOULD"s and "MAY"s from an RFC.

> reliably delivered between nodes and to servers.

Reviewer 2: My buzzword sense is tingling here. On a more serious note, to me it is not immediately clear how using "protocols that are at the leading edge of innovation" result in reliably delivered data. I would either remove the second part or maybe reword it a bit to have more synergy between the two parts of the sentence :)

> 

Reviewer 4: Should add remark on versatility, e.g., 
"The use cases for IoT systems are manifold and so are their 
requirements. Therefore, design decisions in RIOT should not prefer one technology or 
one protocol over another." (originally noted by @OlegHahm)

# 2. Example Use Cases

In all use cases, RIOT provides a base for some further development. Direct
users of RIOT will therefore be organizations who have some programming skill
available, and want to optimize quality, cost and time-to-deployment.

Below are a list of potential use cases with a short description of technical
requirements for each.

## Environmental sensing

This requires a node to be able to wake up at a time of the order of hours and

> deliver a data point. This node should be able to operate, without being

Reviewer 2: Maybe change "data point" to "measurement" or "measurements", a node could do a single measurement of multiple types such as temperature, humidity, CO2 and so on.

connected to power infrastructure, for timescales of the order of years. It
should not run out of power and the timings should not drift unacceptably.

## Easy fit, power supply-free smart home devices

This requires a node to last for a number of weeks without recharge, for example
to continue operating if a user is on holiday. It should be able to send fairly
continuous data over a widely supported wireless LAN protocol, in order to

> support commercial home gateways.

Reviewer 2: is this support as in work together with a commercial home gateway?

## Communication daughterboards for low-power protocols

This requires RIOT to support popular emerging low-power protocols, and to
provide robust and stable support for commonly used microcontrollers and

> transcievers.

Reviewer 2: This doesn't really sound like a scenario to me, more like a requirement

## Wearables

This requires a node to be extremely light and low power, and to send data to a
public gateway over a very low bandwidth connection, for example LoRaWAN, or to
the user's smartphone, for example over Bluetooth. The device would require
charging perhaps every week.

## Diagnostic collection and/or control of traditionally non-powered devices

This requires a node to be able to be retrofitted to a non-powered device such
as a personal transportation device or item of public infrastructure, to be able
to harvest energy from that device or last for a number of weeks or months
without charging, to perform sensing of environmental or mechanical parameters,
and to send data to a user's phone or a public wide-area network.

## Building heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC)

This requires a node to be able to be retrofitted to an already existing
building, which may involve wireless communication but will likely involve a
provided power source to the node. It will involve sensing of environmental
conditions such as temperature, air quality and composition, and be able to
feed back data at a rate that allows control of those conditions.

> 

Reviewer 2: duplicate newline

# 3. List of design philosophies

Below are a list of our design philosophies, including, where appropriate,
an indication of relative priorities.

## Energy efficiency

RIOT nodes should be able to survive for years without running out of power.

> This means that they need to be able to be extremely conservative with power,

Reviewer 4: ... means that RIOT software needs to be optimized w.r.t. minimizing power consumption

> and harvest any available energy from the environment.

Reviewer 4: Don't think that energy harvesting is a mandatory feature. Rather "power and energy management, and possibly energy harvesting capabilities"

## Real-time capabilities

For non-control and low-frequency sensing applications, precise knowledge of the

> data capture time is not neccessary. Nevertheless, RIOT users may wish to use

Reviewer 4: Does this statement help?

the operating system in control or high frequency data capture applications, and

> in such a case, harder real-time guarantees and more accurate timing should be

Reviewer 4: RIOT provides soft real-time capabilities

achievable at the expense of power consumption and configuration difficulty.

## Small memory footprint

> RIOT aims to support constrained devices in class 1 [1]. This means that

Reviewer 3: class 0!

Reviewer 4: Sure? On which device of RAM << 10 KiB runs any Internet-of-Things OS?

Reviewer 3: RIOT happily serves CoAP via dual-stack IPv4/IPv6 using ~3kB RAM, with room for improvement. Not with gnrc, though.

Reviewer 2: >  The common understanding is that class 0 devices are not citizens of the IoT.

The referenced RFC states that class 0 devices are probably so resource constrained that they are unable to communicate directly with the internet. So I think requiring full IPv4 or IPv6 with CoAP is not within the definition of a class 0 device anymore. If I read the rfc (maybe a bit too liberal) (a cluster of) sensor nodes communicating with a more capable proxy over a low level (wired) protocol could count as class 0 devices.

Reviewer 4: Yep, but this is not an IoT citizen. Honestly, a device with a few dozen or hundred Bytes of RAM should not hold a neighbor cache.

Reviewer 3: > The referenced RFC states that class 0 devices are probably so resource constrained that they are unable to communicate directly with the internet.

Is it class 0 if it is too constrained to communicate directly with the internet, or is it class 0 if it is too small to be acurately described by class 1?

Reviewer 6: > Honestly, a device with a few dozen or hundred Bytes of RAM should not hold a neighbor cache.

And as a non-routing 6LN it does not need to according to RFC 6775 (but I guess this isn't what @kaspar030 is aiming at).

Reviewer 2: > Yep, but this is not an IoT citizen. Honestly, a device with a few dozen or hundred Bytes of RAM should not hold a neighbor cache.

@tcschmidt Why this focus on "IoT citizen"? It is not mentioned in this paragraph or in this document, do you have a definition for this term for me? To me it sounds very constraining to limit the applications of RIOT to this "IoT citizen" term

> Is it class 0 if it is too constrained to communicate directly with the internet, or is it class 0 if it is too small to be acurately described by class 1?

[The RFC](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7228) states:
> They are so severely constrained in memory and processing capabilities that most likely they will not have the resources required to communicate directly with the Internet in a secure manner (rare heroic, narrowly targeted implementation efforts notwithstanding).

Reviewer 4: Class 0, C0 | << 10 KiB             | << 100 KiB    
... as the fine manual states.

Reviewer 6: > And as a non-routing 6LN it does not need to according to RFC 6775 (but I guess this isn't what @kaspar030 is aiming at).

Actually, was starting to implement a very reduced 6LN-only IPv6 stack in my spare time. Sadly, didn't had the time yet to come back to it (or back @kaspar030's claims here). But in theory a 6LN-only stack would only need a default route, an auto-configured link-local and global address (which can be for maximum RAM-saving also inferred just from a 6Lo compression context + link-local address). Maybe also some additional state.

Reviewer 4: Mhmm, I could think of activities a lot more interesting and even more relevant. A good, full-featured stack implementation should suffice if it is modular enough. Sending hard-coded packets with magically numbered MAC addresses is not inspiring for networking people ;)

Reviewer 6: > Mhmm, I could think of activities a lot more interesting and even more relevant. A good, full-featured stack implementation should suffice if it is modular enough. Sending hard-coded packets with magically numbered MAC addresses is not inspiring for networking people ;)

That was not my intend with that implementation. A full-featured stack was not the intention of my experiments there. Just the minimal requirements of what RFC 6775 asks from a non-routing 6LN. Modularity sometimes makes assumptions of other modules being there and thus need some code around it. A somewhat monolithic stack tailored just to 6LN+CoAP-server functionality might just fit those constraints without hardcoding magic numbers ;-) (ideally they are vendor supplied in ROM anyways).

Reviewer 6: (because of lacking client functionality this wouldn't be compatible to CoAP-RD of course)

Reviewer 4: > @tcschmidt Why this focus on "IoT citizen"? It is not mentioned in this paragraph or in this document, do you have a definition for this term for me? To me it sounds very constraining to limit the applications of RIOT to this "IoT citizen" term

A lot of people (including me) consider a key value of RIOT that it is an *IoT* operating system. Full-featured Internet-working by GNRC is one of its most important capabilities. Of course, one could strip this all off, but then we are approaching a state of very limited functionality which many 'firmwares' can provide. Just reading a sensor and blinking an LED is the ideal use case of Arduino. RIOT's use cases are those that subsume challenges of distributed systems.

Reviewer 4: > 
> 
> > Mhmm, I could think of activities a lot more interesting and even more relevant. A good, full-featured stack implementation should suffice if it is modular enough. Sending hard-coded packets with magically numbered MAC addresses is not inspiring for networking people ;)
> 
> That was not my intend with that implementation. A full-featured stack was not the intention of my experiments there. Just the minimal requirements of what RFC 6775 asks from a non-routing 6LN. Modularity sometimes makes assumptions of other modules being there and thus need some code around it. A somewhat monolithic stack tailored just to 6LN+CoAP-server functionality might just fit those constraints without hardcoding magic numbers ;-) (ideally they are vendor supplied in ROM anyways).

The challenge is probably to get the modularity right in the sense that little to no overhead or glue code is needed. I would rather focus on even further improving and optimizing GNRC than hacking "something small" at the side. Because: GNRC is a cool concept and a real invention ...

Reviewer 6: > A lot of people (including me) consider a key value of RIOT that it is an IoT operating system. Full-featured Internet-working by GNRC is one of its most important capabilities. Of course, one could strip this all off, but then we are approaching a state of very limited functionality which many 'firmwares' can provide. Just reading a sensor and blinking an LED is the ideal use case of Arduino. RIOT's use cases are those that subsume challenges of distributed systems.

Then see it this way: If we can't run RIOT without networking anymore with a most basic setup than we most definitely have a problem with our modularity.

Reviewer 4: > Then see it this way: If we can't run RIOT without networking anymore with a most basic setup than we most definitely have a problem with our modularity.

This is getting me wrong: I was not saying that we *cannot* run RIOT without networking. What I meant: The interesting use cases for RIOT are with networking ... and we are discussing a (non-exhaustive) enumeration of *striking* use cases here.

Reviewer 4: > > there are just some things you can't optimize away in GNRC without yielding really ugly code.
> 
> ... and/or without changing its design fundamentals.

I'm really not sure about this absolutist statement: changing the layout of sub-modules can change a lot. However, if we want to speak IPv6, we need to hold a 1280 Byte packet in a buffer. And I guess, we cannot do this without a little more than 1 KB of RAM. And I'm even not sure whether the packet buffer cannot be optimized for this single packet case without sacrificing its multi-packet handling.

Reviewer 3: > I'm really not sure about this absolutist statement: changing the layout of sub-modules can change a lot. 

Well, GNRC concept is based around pktsnips and netapi. The former requires *multiple allocations* per packet. The latter requires *passing multiple messages* (as of now, even between threads and thus incurring *multiple context switches per packet*).

Both are setting a lower bound on memory consumption, runtime efficiency and predictability. Removing those is certainly possible, but the result would conceptually be a different network stack, and would certainly require much more rework than *changing the layout of sub-modules".

> However, if we want to speak IPv6, we need to hold a 1280 Byte packet in a buffer. And I guess, we cannot do this without a little more than 1 KB of RAM. And I'm even not sure whether the packet buffer cannot be optimized for this single packet case without sacrificing its multi-packet handling.

This is what happens if standards are not interpreted with actual use in mind. A non-routing node with only one defined application (e.g., CoAP) does *not* need to support 1280b MTU in order to be standards compliant. It is *perfectly acceptable* to drop incoming packets larger than what the application would drop anyways.

Don't pin me at <=1KB of RAM, ~3 KB RAM is enough for an IoT citizen. That is still way below the ~10KB that RFC7228 states for class one. For a 6LN, even 1kB might be enough.

@tcschmidt I understand you're not interested in work resulting in lowering IoT minimal RAM usage. But are you opposed to having that aim in this RDM?

Reviewer 4: > A non-routing node with only one defined application (e.g., CoAP) does not need to support 1280b MTU in order to be standards compliant. It is perfectly acceptable to drop incoming packets larger than what the application would drop anyways.

Interesting statement, I never heard this: Can you backup with a corresponding RFC?

Reviewer 4: > @tcschmidt I understand you're not interested in work resulting in lowering IoT minimal RAM usage. But are you opposed to having that aim in this RDM?

This is getting me wrong: Of course we all follow the objective to optimize RAM (resources). However, I'm making the case against unrealistic design goals and non-interoperable implementations.

1. The common, reasonable understanding is that class 0 devices are not in the horizon of IoT nodes, and RIOT has never really addressed those.
2. Implementations that violate standards (and hence interoperability) for the sake of resource efficiency are IMO simply a fallback into the early 2000-years of WSN handicraft work. The objective of RIOT is to professionalize beyond this.

Reviewer 6: > Interesting statement, I never heard this: Can you backup with a corresponding RFC?

[RFC 8200](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8200#section-5):

>    IPv6 requires that every link in the Internet have an MTU of 1280
>    octets or greater.  This is known as the IPv6 minimum link MTU.  On
>    any link that cannot convey a 1280-octet packet in one piece, link-
>    specific fragmentation and reassembly must be provided at a layer
>    below IPv6.

The keyword is IMHO is "convey" here. It would be pretty odd and stickler-to-the-rules-ish to ask from a non-forwarding host (i.e. a host that does not *convey* packets) that it *has to* under all circumstances accept a package of 1280 byte size (or more if we consider fragmentation) if that's not at all within the parameters of this host's application (i.e. the application would in the end just throw it away anyway), just because the RFC says the IPv6 link needs to support 1280 byte.

Reviewer 4: @miri64 this is simply saying that you need something like 6LowPAN - " link-specific fragmentation and reassembly *must* be provided at a layer below IPv6."
As far as I know, any IPv6 node must be able to at least receive 1280 Bytes packets. This actually has a pretty strong reasoning behind. Giving up the 1280 bounds IMO means leaving the IPv6 protocol standard - and do something for private use.

Reviewer 7: Maybe I'm wrong, but it seems that this discussion is biased by the idea that IoT == IP based networking. Which it is not.
Think of LoRaWAN for example: `examples/lorawan` fits into 7kB of RAM (without optimization), so even if it's not <<10kB, it fits into class 0 devices. And LoRaWAN is considered an IoT protocol.

Reviewer 3: > As far as I know, any IPv6 node must be able to at least receive 1280 Bytes packets. This actually has a pretty strong reasoning behind. Giving up the 1280 bounds IMO means leaving the IPv6 protocol standard - and do something for private use.

How is "receive" defined? If the node "receives" then silently drops the packet, is it an acceptable optimization to not write the packet in any buffer in the meantime?

Anyhow, if the interaction with a node that "violates" the standard is indistinguishable from a node that does not violate the standard, it couldn't matter less.

Reviewer 6: > As far as I know, any IPv6 node must be able to at least receive 1280 Bytes packets. This actually has a pretty strong reasoning behind. Giving up the 1280 bounds IMO means leaving the IPv6 protocol standard - and do something for private use.

Mhh.. the that comes to my mind where the application is not the deciding factor are router advertisements. They can - even in a 6LoWPAN - get pretty big (prefix option, 6Lo context options, ABRO, etc), but are also link-specific. Every other case, where IPv6 packets can natively get bigger are either forwarding related (e.g. [per fragment extension headers](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8200#section-4.5) or use-case related (e.g. IPsec extension headers).

Reviewer 6: > How is "receive" defined? If the node "receives" then silently drops the packet, is it an acceptable optimization to not write the packet in any buffer in the meantime?
>
> Anyhow, if the interaction with a node that "violates" the standard is indistinguishable from a node that does not violate the standard, it couldn't matter less.

If the silent dropping of the packet results in the node not being able to join the network properly or decipher context information for other packets given in that packet (see my RA example above), it is distinguishable from an implementation not violating the standard.

Reviewer 4: > 
> 
> > How is "receive" defined? If the node "receives" then silently drops the packet, is it an acceptable optimization to not write the packet in any buffer in the meantime?
> > Anyhow, if the interaction with a node that "violates" the standard is indistinguishable from a node that does not violate the standard, it couldn't matter less.
> 
> If the silent dropping of the packet results in the node not being able to join the network properly or decipher context information for other packets given in that packet (see my RA example above), it is distinguishable from an implementation not violating the standard.

"receive" means successfully receive and process. The very simple interoperability issue is: A remote node has no way of telling link-specific properties at its destination and we cannot rely on path MTU discovery.

Reviewer 4: > Anyhow, if the interaction with a node that "violates" the standard is indistinguishable from a node that does not violate the standard, it couldn't matter less.

Well, it of course matters. The simple insight: these Deerings and Hindens actually have used a lot of brain to make communication between nodes a success. If we don't want successful communication, we can just cut out the entire stack - that saves resources.

Reviewer 6: > "receive" means successfully receive and process. The very simple interoperability issue is: A remote node has no way of telling link-specific properties at its destination and we cannot rely on path MTU discovery.

I still think this is the wrong argument for a **non-forwarding** end-point of a path. Even if it would accept 1280 B sized packets it still can silently discard the packet for any other reason and thus it is, as @kaspar030 put it, indistinguishable from not accepting the 1280 B sized packet. A "too big" RA illustrates the problem better for me.

Reviewer 3: > If the silent dropping of the packet results in the node not being able to join the network properly or decipher context information for other packets given in that packet (see my RA example above), it is distinguishable from an implementation not violating the standard.

I have to agree on that. So given we cannot stream-parse RA's, the lower bound for IPv6 memory usage goes up by 1KB. I then state that <4KB of memory is enough for an IoT citizen. That is still way below 10KB. Should we call it "class 0.5"?

Reviewer 5: @aabadie not necessarily. The discussion is about what drives the community, or more precisely for which journey we need a community at all. In the context of Internet communication, it is about interoperability (liberally speaking, based on whatever spec). 

If you design an implementation that perfectly fits a specific use case, you can do this, but should the community rely or work on this specific use case? I don't think so. 

"A non-routing node with only one defined application (e.g., CoAP)" [@kaspar030] needs CoAP. Technically, CoAP packets allow for "payload data [which] extends from after the marker to the end of the UDP datagram, i.e., the Payload" [RFC 7252]

Anyhow, the RIOT community should not work on being interoperable only within their own community.

Reviewer 4: > Mhh.. the only thing that comes to my mind where the application is not the deciding factor 

@miri64 applications also matter: a node does not know what exactly its correspondents will send. You are always free to only speak the way you want (or can handle - as long as you are within the standards), but your correspondent may neither know nor care about your deficits. This is the cores story of *interoperability* enabled by standards.

Reviewer 4: > 
> 
> Maybe I'm wrong, but it seems that this discussion is biased by the idea that IoT == IP based networking. Which it is not.
> Think of LoRaWAN for example: `examples/lorawan` fits into 7kB of RAM (without optimization), so even if it's not <<10kB, it fits into class 0 devices. And LoRaWAN is considered an IoT protocol.

Strong statement: LoRA is a link-layer technology that is augmented by a propitiatory deployment setting called "LoRAWAN". The "Internet of Things" is based on Internet standards, an IoT node is expected to  speak IPv6.

Reviewer 6: > @miri64 applications also matter: a node does not know what exactly its correspondents will send. You are always free to only speak the way you want (or can handle - as long as you are within the standards), but your correspondent may neither know nor care about your deficits. This is the cores story of interoperability enabled by standards.

Yes, but same goes for a sender that does not use the agreed-upon (size-optimized) data-format (i.e. standard) for the application.

Reviewer 3: > The very simple interoperability issue is: A remote node has no way of telling link-specific properties at its destination and we cannot rely on path MTU discovery.

If the application protocol doesn't ever use "large" packets, the interoperability problem starts when Firefox tries to http-connect to the corresponding port. Would the remote speak the protocol as defined, no packets larger than the maximum packet size as specified by the protocol.

Reviewer 4: > 
> > * The common, reasonable understanding is that class 0 devices are not in the horizon of IoT nodes, and RIOT has never really addressed those.
> 
> Yes, that was state of the art 2014. Are you saying that we should stay there, ignorant of the advances in implementations? Why not innovate and then update that RFC to reflect the actual lower bounds?
> 

Interesting statement. Maybe I missed the "advances in implementations". However, the statement "common, reasonable understanding is that class 0 devices are not in the horizon of IoT nodes" was still valid this spring. I can try to get an update in Bangkok about the latest disruptions.

Reviewer 4: > Yes, but same goes for a sender that does not use the agreed-upon (e.g. size-optimized) data-format (i.e. standard) for the application.

I don't get this. Are you referring to a sender that does not speak 6LowPan on an 802.15.5 link?
Anyway, the entire story of Standards is that members who comply to them can interoperate. Standards are the *only* agreements here. If standards are violated, inter-operation may fail.

Reviewer 3: > Are you referring to a sender that does not speak 6LowPan on an 802.15.4 link?

Example Standard:
Sender MUST send a UDP packet to port 8888 with the content "HELLO".
Receiver MUST reply to any UDP packet on port 8888 and content "HELLO" with the content "WORLD". It MUST silently drop all other UDP packets received on that port.

The RA issue aside, a node that *only* runs a server for Example Standard, what's the packet buffer size the network stack it needs?

Reviewer 4: ??? Unclear what this means: Of course you can send "Hello" on UDP port 8888, but a network stack that can only send "Hello" on UDP port 8888 is not a network stack, but an introductory programming exercise. It is simply of no use - except in the case of a handcrafted firmware that is deployed in a proprietary regime.

Reviewer 4: > 
> 
> > "receive" means successfully receive and process. The very simple interoperability issue is: A remote node has no way of telling link-specific properties at its destination and we cannot rely on path MTU discovery.
> 
> I still think this is the wrong argument for a **non-forwarding** end-point of a path. Even if it would accept 1280 B sized packets it still can silently discard the packet for any other reason and thus it is, as @kaspar030 put it, indistinguishable from not accepting the 1280 B sized packet. A "too big" RA illustrates the problem better for me.

@miri64 this subject is completely independent of forwarding versus non-forwarding. If you cannot handle valid IPv6 packets, but must silently drop, then you miserably fail. Presenting a stack that cannot do this is IMO not even worth thinking about. It will at most work in a proprietary environment - and that do all the proprietary industrial protocols, as well. Why thinking about IPv6, when you can only speak to your kind? It would be a ridiculous waste to handle IPv6 addresses while you can just exchange bits with your immediate predefined correspondent!

Reviewer 6: @tcschmidt there is more nuance between sending 1280B packets and sending bits...

Reviewer 6: BTW does anyone know where the number 1280B came from. The RFC doesn't offer much explanation and the more I think about it, with all the arguments we had in this thread, it seems pretty arbitrary to me (yes it's *the* number given in the standard so there can't be any discussion about it in this context, but an answer to that question would be nice anyway).

Reviewer 6: Don't get me wrong, I understand that the number needs to be somewhat largish for fragment-wise extension headers, so arbitrary might be the wrong word, but why isn't it e.g. 1024 (which would be the next binary round number)? Why isn't it 1500 (a number also mentioned in the RFC and used as maximum frame size for Ethernet e.g.)? Why 1024+256?

Reviewer 4: @danpetry don't get lost here: The naked RIOT kernel consumes about 1.5 KiB memory ... so barely fits on a class 0 device. This entire discussion is  illusional. I can ask people in the IETF whether they ever heard of an IPv6-networked general purpose OS that fits on nodes with ~1KiB (not in my name, though ;) ). Even if so, it is certainly not RIOT. The class 0 target imo makes no sense  for RIOT.

Reviewer 3: > Of course you can send "Hello" on UDP port 8888, but a network stack that can only send "Hello" on UDP port 8888 is not a network stack, but an introductory programming exercise. It is simply of no use - except in the case of a handcrafted firmware that is deployed in a proprietary regime.

I was describing a hypothetical protocol that sits on top of any network stack. The point is that if an implementation of that protocol would be the only application on an embedded IPv6 stack, that stack doesn't need 1280b buffers (RA issue aside). For something less hypothetical, replace the HELLO WORLD protocol by a simple coap server serving temperature values.

Reviewer 4: > 
> 
> > Of course you can send "Hello" on UDP port 8888, but a network stack that can only send "Hello" on UDP port 8888 is not a network stack, but an introductory programming exercise. It is simply of no use - except in the case of a handcrafted firmware that is deployed in a proprietary regime.
> 
> I was describing a hypothetical protocol that sits on top of any network stack. The point is that if an implementation of that protocol would be the only application on an embedded IPv6 stack, that stack doesn't need 1280b buffers (RA issue aside). For something less hypothetical, replace the HELLO WORLD protocol by a simple coap server serving temperature values.

Yes I know. But what you are describing is your own private protocol that is implemented by the same person (OS) on both ends. This is of course possible, but called proprietary. This is not the Internet and this does not need IP. This can be done with RIOT (without any IP stack), but is very boooring (has been done for decades now without success). The interesting potential of RIOT is that it cooperates in a very heterogeneous IoT.

Reviewer 4: > > This entire discussion is illusional. I can ask people in the IETF whether they ever heard of an IPv6-networked general purpose OS that fits on nodes with ~1KiB (not in my name, though ;) ). Even if so, it is certainly not RIOT. The class 0 target imo makes no sense for RIOT.
> 
> RIOT is not a general purpose OS. It is an embedded OS. Ask them if the think it is possible to have a 6LN in ~1KB.

RIOT is a general purpose IoT OS for constrained (embedded) nodes. RIOT didn't start with the aim to be sub-size and smaller than anything else on earth. And I don't think this would be a promising objective: The real 'smart dust' can do a handful of operations, at most, and these are better handcrafted - not only because of resources, but foremost because of complexity: My trivial code better remains trivial ... 

> @tcschmidt What is your message here? GNRC is _good enough_, let's optimize that a little more and keep "timely implementing coming standards"?
>
GNRC is pretty cool and it is a shame that we don't leverage its gifts: This repeated 'strategy' of keeping upper layer protocols 'stack-independent' has prevented us from having running stack compositions with relevant protocols like DTLS etc.. It's rather ridiculous.

Our measurements have shown that GNRC is doing quite well in comparison to competing stacks like lwip and uIP - also in terms of memory footprint. Of course it could be improved and optimized - we currently don't have the time for it. However, we are sitting on solid grounds with GNRC and have learned to love its recursive composability in the quite successful ICN context.
 
> I hate to break it to you, but there's a couple of other embedded IOT operating systems on the market. RIOT had an edge at some point, but that is long gone. 

Surprising remark: it is only very recently that RIOT started to deliver more accurately what it promised. We are still fighting the reputation flaws accumulated from the many shortcomings of the early days. So I would state the opposite: RIOT is on its way to deliver just right now.

Regarding companies with money: We are used to trading brain against money since years. It hasn't been too bad, though.

> We can now look at RFC from 2014 stating class 0 devices cannot do proper internet, make it our doctrine and keep on "timely implementing standards".

You're getting me wrong: First, I talked to the authors of this RFC about the same subject only this year and didn't learn about apparent reasons for a change (I wonder what that should be anyway). Second, I'm not making it a 'doctrine'. Instead, we are discussing a general design document for RIOT and this document just would not carry much weight if filled with unrealistic and counter-productive content. Demanding class-0 compliance would wipe out a huge code portion off the RIOT repo. On the contrary, no one objects modules to be extremely well optimized and ultra small.

Reviewer 3: > Yes I know. But what you are describing is your own private protocol that is implemented by the same person (OS) on both ends. This is of course possible, but called proprietary. This is not the Internet and this does not need IP. This can be done with RIOT (without any IP stack), but is very boooring (has been done for decades now without success). The interesting potential of RIOT is that it cooperates in a very heterogeneous IoT.

No, I was trying to explain that there are perfectly in-standard (non-proprietary) deployments where e.g., a CoAP only sensor node never needs to transmit or receive "large" transport layer packets.

Reviewer 3: > GNRC is pretty cool and it is a shame that we don't leverage its gifts: This repeated 'strategy' of keeping upper layer protocols 'stack-independent' has prevented us from having running stack compositions with relevant protocols like DTLS etc.. It's rather ridiculous.

Or, keeping upper layer protocols stack-independent allows us to use different network stacks where GNRC's goals don't fit.

It is all well and good that you're proud of GNRC, but it seems to me you're trying to base RIOT's design goals around GNRC's design goals. IMO that is completely unnecessary. GNRC has its place, but we should not limit RIOT's goals with it.

One of RIOT's greatest strengths is its modularity. Most RIOT papers start stating that it can run on <32bit devices starting with 1.5kB of RAM. That implies to me that one can do usable things on class 0 devices, with RIOT. Over time, that number goes will go down, and that just shows that RIOT keeps getting better optimized and modularized.

> Demanding class-0 compliance would wipe out a huge code portion off the RIOT repo. On the contrary, no one objects modules to be extremely well optimized and ultra small.

Noone demands class0 compliance for all code of RIOT. Just because one of RIOT's goals is to support class 0 devices doesn't mean that all of RIOT's functionality has to. That would be unrealistic or too limiting.

The smallest MCU's RIOT supports currently have 2kB of memory. Supporting them does have a maintanance cost, but it has a *huge* benefit: we're constantly forced to question every bit of resource we use. That shows the higher up the stack you look, and that is why it is important to keep them in the tree. At that point we can stand to it and mention it in our goals.

It seems to me that this class0/1 point is also quite related to the question whether RIOT should be considered a good choice for non-networked applications. If one doesn't think so, and with RIOT's current state of needing a class 1 device for networking, putting class 1 as a goal makes sense. Less so if there are applications running happily on 2kB devices and we think RIOT is a valid choice for them.

How about something like this:

```suggestion
RIOT aims to be usable on low-end devices currently starting at 2 KiB RAM, with increasing functionality on more powerful devices. For networked applications, RIOT currently needs a class 1 device. This means that usable RIOT applications in certain key use cases (remote sensing, for example) consume ~ 10 KiB of RAM and ~100 KiB of ROM, or less.
```

My main intended change is a) we're not dropping low-end devices from our goals, and b) the class 1 requirement gets the word "currently" attached, implying that we're not necessarily stuck there.

Reviewer 4: > 
> 
> > Yes I know. But what you are describing is your own private protocol that is implemented by the same person (OS) on both ends. This is of course possible, but called proprietary. This is not the Internet and this does not need IP. This can be done with RIOT (without any IP stack), but is very boooring (has been done for decades now without success). The interesting potential of RIOT is that it cooperates in a very heterogeneous IoT.
> 
> No, I was trying to explain that there are perfectly in-standard (non-proprietary) deployments where e.g., a CoAP only sensor node never needs to transmit or receive "large" transport layer packets.

CoAP normally expects a full IPv6 layer of 1280 Bytes payload (I know there are some error recovery mechanisms for truncated packets). Of course correspondents could send shorter messages, but as an implementer we don't know what the correspondent (whom we did not implement) will do. So we need to comply to standards.

Reviewer 3: > CoAP normally expects a full IPv6 layer of 1280 Bytes payload (I know there are some error recovery mechanisms for truncated packets). Of course correspondents could send shorter messages, but as an implementer we don't know what the correspondent (whom we did not implement) will do. So we need to comply to standards.

Don't mix up implementation and usage. Of course all our IPv6 network stacks will support 1280b packets on the implementation side. But most of them will probably support configuring a smaller buffer, should the application not need 1280b. (e.g., gnrc_minimal sets a packet buffer size <1280b).

> I know there are some error recovery mechanisms for truncated packets

And how do you get truncated packets? riiiight, there in the standard, transport layer receive buffers < 1280b and how to deal with them.

Reviewer 4: > Don't mix up implementation and usage. 

??? At the time of implementation, even at the time of deployment, you don't know the exact usage. So nothing to mix up here.

> > I know there are some error recovery mechanisms for truncated packets
> 
> And how do you get truncated packets? riiiight, there in the standard, transport layer receive buffers < 1280b and how to deal with them.

Please let me refer to the fine manual: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7252

Reviewer 3: > Please let me refer to the fine manual: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7252

Yup, 4.6, implementation note:

```
If an
      implementation is too constrained to allow for allocating the
      above-mentioned upper bound, it could apply the following
      implementation strategy for messages not using DTLS security:
      Implementations receiving a datagram into a buffer that is too
      small are usually able to determine if the trailing portion of a
      datagram was discarded and to retrieve the initial portion.  So,
      at least the CoAP header and options, if not all of the payload,
      are likely to fit within the buffer.  A server can thus fully
      interpret a request and return a 4.13 (Request Entity Too Large;
      see Section 5.9.2.9) Response Code if the payload was truncated.
```

If a request doesn't fit my buffers, returning 4.13 (Request Entity Too Large) is alright.

Stop here as this is off-topic?

Author: > Stop here as this is off-topic?

 I would agree

> RIOT aims to be usable on low-end devices currently starting at 2 KiB RAM, with increasing functionality on more powerful devices. For networked applications, RIOT currently needs a class 1 device. This means that usable RIOT applications in certain key use cases (remote sensing, for example) consume ~ 10 KiB of RAM and ~100 KiB of ROM, or less.

I would remove the first "currently" and rephrase the second sentence to "For networked applications, class 1 devices are primarily supported". Adding "currently" feels like deferring the decision. We can always revise later in another RDM

Reviewer 8: If i can jump in -- this thread is hitting close to home now. :-) I agree that RIOT should be able to handle a 1280b packet. However, I definitely agree that not every scenario needs to handle such a large packet size. Setting up a deployment that assumes a small packet size is a legitimate approach within an LLN where 6LoWPAN/802.15.4 packets are 128 bytes, or BLE packets can be even smaller. One of the coolest things added to RIOT's CoAP support has been the block extension (thanks Kaspar and Koen), where the application payload can be as small as 16 bytes. 

At the same time, at my day job I'm trying to convince people that MQTT on a cellular mote with TCP is a bad idea. For that, it would be nice to leverage RIOT's TCP support to implement the CoAP over TCP RFC. So, I support a composable system that allows development of a solution at both ends of the spectrum. I guess that's like Linux's support from embedded systems up to supercomputers.

Reviewer 8: Just to be clear -- the block extension allows composing or decomposing a larger payload into smaller ones to adapt to these packet size constraints. :-)

Reviewer 4: > 
> 
> Just to be clear -- the block extension allows composing or decomposing a larger payload into smaller ones to adapt to these packet size constraints. :-)

Yes, but this is for efficiency. It does not ensure that my neighbor does not send larger packets or without block mode. Let's recall the Internet design principle: "Be liberal in what you expect" ;)

RIOT applications, including their libraries, consume ~ 10 KiB of RAM and ~100

> KiB of ROM, or less. All modules provided by RIOT can be used practically in

Reviewer 4: This is not true and also not desirable. We want core components to stay under certain (which ?) memory limits and still support larger modules.

Author: I've rephrased this paragraph to reflect this.

programs of such sizes, except in exceptional circumstances.

> ## Constrained networks

Reviewer 4: Constrained networking according to open standards

protocols. RIOT therefore supports emerging protocols that are the best
available to handle these challenging conditions, as well as as a validation
platform for them.

## Short learning curve

Users of RIOT want to be able to develop and deploy their products in as short a
time as possible, with as little extra learning and specialized knowledge as
possible. This means support for standards such as POSIX and a range of
widely-used languages, out-of-the-box examples, simple build configuration, and
tools and platforms that support RIOT.

However, RIOT's reputation is tied to the robustness of those products, and the
users should never be able to cut corners in such a way that the products are
not production ready, even given tight resource constraints. 

Developers, likewise, should be able to start contributing in as short a time as
possible, and so the design and APIs should remain clear and generally follow
common and easy to understand principles, unless there are strong benefits that
directly achieve operational goals.

## Security

Security in all cases is non-negotiable and overrides any competing design

> priorities. This is because of the high importance of protecting users' privacy,

Reviewer 4: Security is not "user's privacy". This para needs rethinking, I suppose.

Author: I have rewritten the first paragraph - is it more correct?

and the corresponding risk to the emerging IoT industry. We are part of the
solution, not the problem.

Note that this use case dependent, and depends on the threats that a device may
reasonably experience as well as the penalty if those threats are realised. RIOT
however will cover potential shortcomings in programming or configuration in all
use cases and assure security nonetheless.

## Modularity

> 

Reviewer 4: Start: "RIOT decomposes into small modules".

Author: Added

> Logical separation of the different modules of RIOT enables a highly distributed

Reviewer 4: The big thing about modules is first: Tailor the OS to user-specific needs.

Author: Added

community to separate development work while reducing the risk of knock-on
effects across the system. It also allows third parties to develop modules,
expanding development efforts from just the RIOT community and repo. There is a
balance to be struck, however: too fine-grained can come at a cost of
unnecessary complexity, higher resources, and difficulty of understanding.

> ## Independence of the underlying hardware

Reviewer 4: Better: Hardware abstraction and cross-hardware portability

Author: Changed

Development should be able to be done once and run on any platform using RIOT.
To achieve this with reduced development effort in porting, the hardware is
abstracted and the APIs are uniform at as low a level as possible.

> 

Reviewer 4: Would add: 
## Robustness and resilience
## Versatility 
## Unified APIs

Author: I've added these sections with some initial text for further refinement.

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure if I like the order of the subsections. For example, the current text in "Versatility" reads like high-order insights that should be moved to the beginning of this section.

# Acknowledgements

Thanks to

# References

[1] [IETF RFC 7228: Terminolgy for Constrained-Node Networks](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7228)

> 

Reviewer 4: Should add reference to 
(1) RIOT initial Infocom poster
(2) RIOT journal (s. @emmanuelsearch )

Author: Added.

learning curve, and the versatility to support a huge variety of devices and
functionality.

# 2. Use cases

RIOT is a general purpose IoT operating system for low-end devices, such as
those described in [1]. These devices have a low memory footprint - kilobytes
rather than megabytes - and an extremely low memory footprint of a few
kilobytes in certain applications. As such, RIOT targets separate use cases from
embedded Linux. Below is a comprehensive, but non-exclusive list of RIOT use
cases, including the general requirements placed on the devices for each one.

These requirements demonstrate the need for RIOT to support an extremely large
number of hardware configurations: various microcontrollers bundled with
various sensors and actuators and various network transcievers (radio and
wired). On these, a large variety of software configurations is run: various
link layer technologies and network protocol stacks, serving user application
logic requiring various levels of complexity, reliability, or real-time
support.

## 2.1. Environmental sensing

Networks of remote sensor nodes can be deployed to monitor the environment (air

> componsition, temperature, light intensity, water quality...), or

Reviewer: componsition -> composition

Author: changed

#### Energy efficiency

RIOT nodes sometimes need to last for several years without external power, so
they need to manage energy carefully. RIOT's tickless scheduler lets devices
sleep while they aren't active.

Modules outside the core should leverage the benefits and address the
programming challenges of such a scheduler, without demanding that users do the
same. An idling device should conserve energy wherever possible, by default.
For case specific power management, appropriate control should be available to
the user.

#### Small memory footprint

Apart from being optimized for low memory usage, RIOT is modular so unused
features don't use up precious RAM or flash. Almost all features are provided
as optional modules that have to be enabled explicitly at compile time.  A
minimal RIOT configuration starts at around <2KiB flash and <1.5KiB RAM
(including stack space for one thread and ISRs).

Starting from there, the memory usage depends on the enabled features:

- Non-networked control loop / sensing applications can fit on very small MCUs
(eg., an Atmega328P with 2KiB RAM)
- 6lowPAN networking currently starts at ~40KiB ROM and ~10KiB RAM

> - A 6lowpan enabled CoAP server requires ~60KiB ROM and ~15KiB RAM

Reviewer: For this amount of Flash and RAM, you can fit not only CoAP but also COSE end-to-end security with ECC in software. Worth mentioning I think. @bergzand @kaspar030 makes sense to you too?

Author: This sounds worth mentioning, I agree

Author: Has anyone got any suggestions for how to collect the metric? Eg any implementations already around involving 6LoWPAN/CoAP/COSE? I couldn't find any readily available

Author: Ping? Any thoughts/further opinions? Leave it out if not?

Reviewer: How about you just change this sentence to:
` A 6LoWPAN enabled CoAP server and COSE end-to-end security (with ed25519 signatures in software) requires ~60KiB ROM and ~15KiB RAM`

Author: Changed, as discussed offline

Reviewer 3: > A 6LoWPAN enabled CoAP server and COSE end-to-end security (with ed25519 signatures in software) requires ~60KiB ROM and ~15KiB RAM

I suggest linking to a wiki page describing the exact configuration measured. I think the mentioned 15KiB RAM usage here are not accurate.

Author: We could just re-state the metrics in Table III [in last year's paper](https://inet.haw-hamburg.de/papers/bghkl-rosos-18.pdf)?

relatively close contact to a highly distributed worldwide organisation with
members joining continuously. As a result, passing on underlying understanding
and assumptions that drive design decisions via word-of-mouth is no longer
feasible. 

This document represents the consensus on a set of generalised, loose
requirements for RIOT (in a voluntary open source context, gathering strict
requirements is neither possible nor welcome).

The first section discusses some of the concrete [use cases](#2-use-cases)
which RIOT is driven by, to give a broad awareness to the developer where and
how their features will be used. Based on this bigger picture, the [design
philosophies](#3-design-philosophies) in the second section provide specific
guidance for design. These include a focus on constrained devices, a short
learning curve, and the versatility to support a huge variety of devices and
functionality.

# 2. Use cases

RIOT is a general purpose IoT operating system for low-end devices, such as
those described in [1]. These devices have a low memory footprint - kilobytes
rather than megabytes - and an extremely low memory footprint of a few

> kilobytes in certain applications. As such, RIOT targets separate use cases from

Reviewer: @danpetry seems like a copy/paste issue here (twice mentioning memory in the sentence?).

I propose rephrasing:

```
These devices have an extremely low memory footprint - kilobytes rather than megabytes or gigabytes - and are typically based on low-power microcontrollers lacking hardware features provided on less constrained devices e.g. an MMU. 
```

Author: This wasn't a copy/paste error: the idea was to say
a) our targeted devices all have ~kilobytes of memory
b) our targeted devices go down to a very small number of kilobytes in certain cases
Does that clarify and do you agree?

Author: Have clarified to:
These devices have a low memory footprint of kilobytes rather than megabytes, going down to a few kilobytes in certain cases.
Does that read better and make the meaning more apparent?

> embedded Linux. Below is a comprehensive, but non-exclusive list of RIOT use

Reviewer: 'non-exhaustive' would be the term here in my opinion.

Author: makes sense to me

Author: changed

cases, including the general requirements placed on the devices for each one.

These requirements demonstrate the need for RIOT to support an extremely large
number of hardware configurations: various microcontrollers bundled with

> various sensors and actuators and various network transcievers (radio and

Reviewer 9: typo: /transcievers/transceivers/

Author: fixed

requires the board to:

  - Support on-chip low-level wired communication.

## 2.8. Education

The broad technical scope of RIOT makes it useful as a basis for education.
In particular, this requires:

  - The presence of didactic materials related to RIOT.
  - The presence of tooling suitable to a classroom context.

# 3. Design philosophies

Below are the design philosophies that are typically followed by developers to
cater for the above use cases. The sections below include descriptions of
tradeoffs between the philosophies, and where the resolutions typically fall.

## Suitability for constrained devices

"Constrained" means that available memory, energy, and processor cycles are so
reduced as to become a dominant consideration in design requirements [1]. 

#### Energy efficiency

RIOT nodes sometimes need to last for several years without external power, so
they need to manage energy carefully. RIOT's tickless scheduler lets devices
sleep while they aren't active.

Modules outside the core should leverage the benefits and address the
programming challenges of such a scheduler, without demanding that users do the

> same. An idling device should conserve energy wherever possible, by default.

Reviewer: this sentence is difficult to parse.
How about splitting it in 2 parts? Maybe something like
1. developers of modules should...
2. users should be able to benefit from RIOT's energy efficiency mechanisms without having to cope with scheduler details or setting power modes explicitly.

Author: So eg:  
Developers of modules outside the core should leverage the benefits and address the
programming challenges of such a scheduler. An idling device should conserve energy wherever possible, by default. For case specific power management, appropriate control should be available to the user. This should not include having to cope with scheduler details or setting power modes explicitly.

Author: changed to the above, let me know if not good

# 2. Use cases

RIOT is a general purpose IoT operating system for low-end devices. As a
result, its use cases are varied: below is a comprehensive, but non-exclusive
list of them, including the general requirements placed on the devices for each
use case.

## 2.1. Environmental sensing

Networks of remote sensor nodes can be deployed to monitor the environment or
assist with urban planning. These devices can be distributed on their own or
fit to infrastructure. The devices need to:

  - Sense air composition, temperature, light quality, water quality, etc
  - Support low-power wireless networking protocols
  - Interoperate with non-RIOT nodes or gateways
  - Collect data on timescales of the order of hours or longer
  - Potentially be able to send data over long ranges
  - Potentially communicate with a smartphone
  - Potentially operate for years without power infrastructure or maintenance

## 2.2. Rapid prototyping, research, and experimentation

In experimentation and hacking situations, development needs to be easily
accessible, and allow a short development time and quick results. This means
that the software and hardware should:

  - Let users prototype easily

>   - Let users easily run and load simple applications

Reviewer 3: what does "run and load" mean? There's no runtime loading of applications (unless lua or jerryscript is used).

Author: Maybe this should be the other way around? It wasn't meant to imply runtime loading so this change might clarify

  - Integrate with home appliances to control temperature, light, power usage,
    etc
  - Be usable but secure for people with no technical knowledge 
  - Connect to a commercial home gateway 
  - Communicate over common home IoT protocols such as ZigBee, Bluetooth, Wi-Fi,
    etc
  - Connect to the building's power or provide their own power, depending on
    the product
  
## 2.7. Daughterboards

Plug-in boards can give devices immediate support for a protocol or standard,
or let them outsource a task from the main processor. This requires the board
to:

  - Perform its promised task reliably
  - Integrate and communicate reliably with the main processor
  - Include and support any relevant hardware

## 2.8. Education

The broad technical scope of RIOT makes it useful as a basis for education.
This requires:

  - The presence of didactic materials related to RIOT
  - Clear and easy to find documentation
  - A general availability of supported hardware and tools

# 3. Design philosophies

RIOT satisfies the requirements of all the use cases given above, and does so
in its own unique way, a way that reflects the collective personality of the

> RIOT community. RIOT is the Friendly IoT Operating System: it is friendly to

Author: addressed

users, allowing them to easily build and deploy IoT solutions that are stable

> and trouble-free.

Author: in this document a "user" refers to a developer who is using RIOT as a basis to implement application software, and "developer" refers to the RIOT OS developer community. Is this the meaning you intended for "developer"?

Below are the design philosophies that are typically followed by developers to
achieve this, including descriptions of tradeoffs between them and where the
resolutions typically fall.

## Suitability for constrained devices

"Constrained" means that available memory, energy, and processor cycles are so
reduced as to become a dominant consideration in design requirements [1]. 

#### Energy efficiency

RIOT nodes sometimes need to last for several years without external power, so
they need to manage energy carefully. RIOT's tickless scheduler lets devices
sleep while they aren't collecting data.

Modules outside the core should leverage the benefits and address the
programming challenges of such a scheduler. They shouldn't demand that users do
the same.  They should, however, allow users to manage power through different
modes and functions.

#### Small memory footprint

Most of RIOT's targeted use cases are well addressed by devices in class 1 of
the taxonomy presented in [1]. If small price differences are important or the

> energy budget is particularly tight, the available memory might be near the

Author: The idea was that smaller memory requires less power. Is this statement correct?

bottom of this class. Over-the-air updating facilities may also reduce the
available ROM by over half, depending on the architecture.

RIOT should provide out-of-the-box support for devices with ~10 KiB of
available RAM and ~100 KiB of ROM. It should be just as possible to address
real use cases involving even smaller devices, starting at ~2 KiB of RAM and
~10 KiB of ROM, via manual configuration, and via modules which prioritize
memory efficiency in their design without of course departing from any
specifications that are used to describe the module.

#### Constrained networking

RIOT should deliver best-in-class communication performance and robustness.

Network stacks should remain up-to-date as relevant standards emerge; they
should be adequately extensible to support this. Users should be able to

> configure them according to technological options, and choose between

Reviewer 5: s/to technological options/to their needs/

Author: addressed

high-quality implementations which address performance tradeoffs differently.
They should be able to get the best performance and most relevant functionality

> out of whatever resources they have available.

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure if I can follow the argumentation. Most aspects are not specific to the networking subsystem in RIOT but might be applied to other parts in RIOT as well.

Regarding networking, I think we want to express that RIOT considers constrained environments but that RIOT values interoperability (for the sake of inter-connectivity = IoT) more than saving one bit. Do we agree on this?

Author: > Most aspects are not specific to the networking subsystem in RIOT but might be applied to other parts in RIOT as well.

Agreed, so the remaining content of the paragraph could address interoperability vs resource usage as you say. If it is to belong in this area then it should only apply to the networking area. Following previous discussions, something that might be possible to generate rough consensus over could be the idea that in the networking area interoperability and extensibility/modularity are more important than resource usage, because the most constrained devices wouldn't be able to run full network stacks. Or, that there are perhaps highly optimised/less flexible/less functionally complete modules for specialised and very constrained applications, but our flagship stacks prioritize interoperability.

@miri64 @kaspar030 it would be good to have your opinion on this.

similar across different types of module. Users shouldn't want to split
modules, but they shouldn't be unnecessarily fine-grained either.

## Cross-hardware portability

Users might want to write a program for one piece of hardware, and later run it
on another. RIOT should let user code be completely portable, so long as it
remains valid with the hardware.

The hardware abstraction layer should be stable, well defined and consistent.
Above the HAL, the only thing that modules should know about hardware is
whether its build dependencies are provided or not. If they aren't, the module
should adapt accordingly, or not compile.

## Real-time capabilities

Different real-time guarantees are required for different use cases. Low
frequency sensing needs only soft real-time support and can handle less timing
accuracy so long as the timers support long timescales. Sensing and control
applications which do not require hard real-time guarantees are also supported.

RIOT should deliver soft real-time guarantees which address the use cases given
in section 2. It should provide timers which can competently handle the
timescales of any application.

> ## Interoperability

Reviewer 5: Why is interoperability limited to networking? What about I2C, USB etc.?

Author: Although I think wireless networking is the main situation when it comes to interoperability, considering the use cases, yes you're right, it's possible to interoperate over wire so this shouldn't be excluded (by implication or otherwise). How about s/network/communication at the beginning of the first paragraph to make it slightly more generic?

  - Let users prototype easily
  - Let users easily run and load simple applications
  - Let users easily set up networking
  - Let users easily port third party libraries
  - Be highly customizable and updateable
  - Support a range of plug-in sensors and actuators
  - Be usable with or without different features, including networking
  - Use commonly available, easy to use development boards
  - Come with an easy-to-use toolkit that has a minimum of setup time
  - Let users easily port programs to different devices.

## 2.3. Logistic tracking

Sensors that record environmental conditions can be used to manage goods in
transit. These sensors need to:

  - Sense position and condition of goods
  - Last for several months without charging
  - Send data over long ranges to regional infrastructure.

## 2.4. Physical system monitoring and control

Distributed networks of sensors and actuators can be employed in certain
control applications, such as automotive systems or Industry 4.0. The nodes
need to:

  - Sense various specific properties such as pressure, torque, velocity, or
    flow
  - Control various specific actuators such as motors, solenoids, or valves

>   - Control motors, solenoids, valves, heating elements, etc

Reviewer 4: This line is a duplicate now, should be removed.

transit. These sensors need to:

  - Sense position and condition of goods
  - Last for several months without charging
  - Send data over long ranges to regional infrastructure.

## 2.4. Physical system monitoring and control

Distributed networks of sensors and actuators can be employed in certain
control applications, such as automotive systems or Industry 4.0. The nodes
need to:

  - Sense pressure, temperature, torque, flow, rotary position and velocity,
    etc
  - Control motors, solenoids, valves, heating elements, etc
  - Collect and send data with a low latency, or at least a well synchronized
    timestamp
  - Potentially have a very low unit cost, particularly when the networks are
    implemented in mass market products such as automobiles
  - Potentially run control algorithms themselves.

## 2.5. Edge systems for building management and automation

Various sensing and environmental control tasks can be done by edge nodes in
buildings. The nodes need to be able to:

  - Sense temperature, light, humidity, pressure, current, etc
  - Control temperature, light, ventilation, etc
  - Connect to the building management system, via wired or wireless connectors

>   - Deliver data with reasonable timing and accuracy.

Reviewer 4: Better:
"reasonable" -> "controllable"

Below are the design philosophies that are typically followed by developers to
achieve this, including descriptions of tradeoffs between them and where the
resolutions typically fall.

## Suitability for constrained devices

"Constrained" means that available memory, energy, and processor cycles are so
reduced as to become a dominant consideration in design requirements [1]. 

#### Energy efficiency

RIOT nodes sometimes need to last for several years without external power, so
they need to manage energy carefully. RIOT's tickless scheduler lets devices
sleep while they aren't collecting data.

Modules outside the core should leverage the benefits and address the
programming challenges of such a scheduler. They shouldn't demand that users do
the same.  They should, however, allow users to manage power through different
modes and functions.

#### Small memory footprint

Most of RIOT's targeted use cases are well addressed by devices in class 1 of
the taxonomy presented in [1]. If small price differences are important or the
energy budget is particularly tight, the available memory might be near the
bottom of this class. Over-the-air updating currently reduces the available ROM

> by over half.

Reviewer 4: I would propose to remove the last sentence, because this is just a comment on the current state of development.

Author: I think this is important to consider in the context of this section, which should serve as a rough guideline for our memory footprint. I've rephrased it as "Over-the-air updating facilities may also reduce the available RIOT by over half, depending on the architecture". Is this more suitable?

Reviewer 4: Don't think so, because you could have implementations that read updates from the network in a tiny bootloader etc. 
Making the case that something needs a certain amount of memory needs to be on firm grounds ... such as: We cannot supply a buffer of 1K in less than 1K memory.

Author: This suggestion was originally made by @haukepetersen . Have talked with him offline about this rationale above, we both agreed, removed

RIOT should provide out-of-the-box support for devices with ~10 KiB of

> available RAM and ~100 KiB of ROM. It should be just as possible to address

Reviewer 4: I would propose to remove the remaining two sentences (starting with "It should be just as possible..."). Below class 1 is not focus and - also in the light of the previous discussion - maybe considered an over-selling.

Reviewer 4: Well, to me this discussion is artificial and a statement  "with manual optimizations and specialised modules" IMO does not serve well as guidance for developing a versatile, multi-purpose OS.  
I would still propose to remove at least the last sentence - "Users should be given the choice of what they want to spend their memory on." - because this is an empty phrase given that a desired function comes at a minimal cost.

Author: The sentiment that I've picked up is that this is a real discussion - for example, people have cited the comments of one of the speakers at the last Summit that our key differentiator is that we have a slimmer memory footprint than the competition and that we should continue to strengthen that aspect. That to me is not at all artificial (if I understand correctly what you meant by the word).  

Re the language - to make it more tight - perhaps "with manual optimizations and specialized modules" -> "via configuration and modules that prioritize memory efficiency in their design, without of course departing from specifications". And delete the last sentence.

Reviewer 3: +1 for removing ""Users should be given the choice of what they want to spend their memory on."

Other than that, I don't understand the aversion to supporting low-end embedded devices.

To me RIOT is the first choice for creating *any* application involving MCUs. I do choose it even on the smallest supported platforms (e.g., Arduino Uno, with 2kB of RAM), e.g., for simple Arduino-style control tasks. For reference, hello-world on that board uses ~1250B RAM, so there's room to spare for quite some control logic.
While on a board that small I can certainly not enjoy RIOT's awesome networking options, many of RIOT's perks make it a valid first choice (even compared to the Arduino libraries):

- nice and compact periph APIs
- multi-threading
- portability (upgrade path) to other (larger) MCUs using the same application code
- large collection of supported sensors (with similar, familiar APIs)

I don't see why using RIOT on those systems is only possible "with manual optimizations and specialized modules".

It all depends on the application, but RIOT is a good fit for ~2kB RAM systems for use in control tasks (which means basically anything that the supported Atmega 328p is capable of). Why state otherwise in the design goals?

Reviewer 4: There is no aversion against small memory footprint or the like - if RIOT achieves highest efficiency that's great. Still I'm hesitant with raising the wrong expectations - and manually optimized specialized modules sound like bare-metal firmware to me. 
Maybe a good solution here is to state that the RIOT kernel consumes 1.5kB RAM and - depending on the application and the modules loaded - the overall size of the system can be below 10kB.

Reviewer 6: > and manually optimized specialized modules sound like bare-metal firmware to me.

@kaspar030 mentioned no such thing about this. Fact is we do support small devices (without networking capabilities) like the Arduino Uno and I agree with @kaspar030 that for some developers RIOT might be the nicer API than the somewhat clunky, C++-based Arduino API.

Reviewer 3: > IMO it is important to be precise here so not to raise the impression that RIOT (including all prominent features) is a thing that can run usually on 2 kB RAM.

Well, isn't it important to raise awareness that for the 2kB Arduino class, RIOT is actually a good choice, for the type of applications that can usually be done on those devices?

Reviewer 4: I don't object mentioning, as long as the case is clearly stated. My fear is that people get disappointed if expectations are raised that later turn out to be unrealistic.

Author: If the size of the kernel is now relatively stable and at a size we're happy with, it could be helpful to state the size along with a statement that it shouldn't grow more than this size in its default configuration. We could also be more specific about the kinds of applications that can be run on devices with 2KiB RAM and 10 KiB ROM? Some of the aspects mentioned:
- no networking support
- support for sensors and actuators with straightforward (not much control logic in the driver, for example) functionality
- space for simple control and sensing application logic
If anyone can think of any more detail or refine these statements further, that would be useful

Reviewer 3: I think we're looking at this from the wrong angle. We're trying to make "there are valid uses cases on 2kB AVR" fit with "our main focus is IoT on class 1 upwards" thinking. I'm not sure we can converge on a "primary use case" as in "class 1 IoT", which I personally just consider as one of the many uses of RIOT. So how about we explain that RIOT's memory usage *depends* and give examples of actual applications:

How about something like this:

```
Apart from being optimized for low memory usage, RIOT tries very hard to be as modular as possible so unused features don't use up precious RAM or flash. Almost all features are provided as optional modules that have to be enabled explicitly at compile time.
A minimal RIOT configuration starts at around <2KiB flash and <1.5KiB RAM (including stack space for one thread and ISRs).

Starting from there, the memory usage depends on the enabled features:

- non-networked control loop / sensing applications can fit on very small MCUs (eg., an Atmega328P with 2KiB RAM)
- 6lowPAN networking currently starts at ~10KiB RAM
- a file system adds X kB
- Javascript needs Y kIB
- security, OTA  Z KiB (might want to link the coming OTA paper for numbers)
- use of C library (it's huge) vs use of more optimized libs (printf vs. fmt)
- a 6lowpan/RPL enabled CoAP server with secure OTA enabled needs xx KiB RAM, yy KiB flash
```

Reviewer 4: @kaspar030 I agree on the 'angle' and also on the approach of just listing relevant configurations. This will be (a) informative and (b) transparent, so the reader can judge what is important for his or her context.

Author: I think being more specific is a good path. Would this be able to be directed further in a way which helps a RIOT kernel developer to judge how far they should optimize their new module for size? For example, we could angle it as a list of indicative sizes (+ size range, special cases, etc) for certain types of feature? And point out making available optimized libraries alongside more fully functional ones?

Author: Also if anyone has any values to propose for X, Y, Z which they know off the top of their head, that would be great, otherwise I'll get some build size metrics and propose some values myself

real use cases involving even smaller devices, starting at ~2 KiB of RAM and
~10 KiB of ROM, with manual optimizations and specialised modules. Users should
be given the choice of what they want to spend their memory on.

#### Constrained networking

> RIOT should deliver best-in-class communication bandwidth and robustness.

Reviewer 4: Better: "bandwidth" -> "performance"

Network stacks should remain up-to-date as relevant standards emerge; they
should be adequately extensible to support this. Users should be able to adapt

> them and choose between different stacks; they should be able to get the best

Reviewer 4: I find this statement difficult: "Users should be able to adapt them and choose between different stacks;"
This is for two reasons: 
 - What does adapt mean? Do you mean "configure according to technological options"?
 - Choosing between different protocol implementations is fine, if they are available. However, I don't think it is an objective of RIOT to provide multiple implementations of all networking protocols. Rather, we should be happy to provide a large variety of networking options at a high level of quality.

Author: Point1: yes; point2: I agree, I have clarified this statement

performance and most relevant functionality out of whatever resources they have
available.

## Short learning curve

> RIOT's use cases involve makers, researchers in non-computer science fields,

Reviewer 4: Maybe "(non-)computer science fields" - we have both.

> broadly skilled engineers making proofs-of-concept in IoT startups, and

Reviewer 4: Why only startups? Maybe remove:
"making proofs-of-concept in IoT startups" -> "making proofs-of-concept"

experienced embedded C developers.

All of these users should be comfortable using RIOT and its tooling, whatever
their platform or hardware. No user of any skill level should be tripped up
because they haven't configured something that they wouldn't reasonably be
expected to know about. Whatever the user's background, RIOT should demand as
little RIOT-specific learning as possible. It should, therefore, adhere to
common systems and networking standards such as C99, POSIX, libc, UDP, CoAP,

> IPv6, and so on wherever it makes sense.

Reviewer 4: This list appears a bit too arbitrary - maybe cut it?
"It should, therefore, adhere to common systems and networking standards"

## Vendor and technology independence

Vendors and technologies are supported with zero bias. This means users can
choose what's best for them, without being led by RIOT. Moreover, RIOT is Free
Software [2], which means users are free to use it as they wish without
lock-in.

The choice of the hardware and standards RIOT supports should depend only on
how well they support the use cases. Any allegiance that modules may have
should be kept to themselves.

## Versatility

The use cases for IoT systems are monifold, and so are their requirements.
Therefore, design decisions in RIOT should not prefer one technology or one
protocol over another. 

Default configurations should support as many users and use cases as possible.

> RIOT should provide everything users need, either in its code base or in the

Reviewer 4: Maybe a bit more humble: "RIOT should aim at providing everything ..."?

external packages it supports. The list of hardware, algorithms and other
elements that RIOT supports should constantly be expanding.

## Modularity

RIOT decomposes into small modules. Being modular lets RIOT address many
different memory, functionality, and performance demands. It also helps
development efforts to scale in a widely distributed community.

Modules should be abstracted from one another as cleanly as possible. It should
be easy for users to manage or exploit this modularity, for example through
configuration methods, easy integration of third-party source code, or
different levels of modularity. The granularity of modules should be stable and
similar across different types of module. Users shouldn't want to split
modules, but they shouldn't be unnecessarily fine-grained either.

## Cross-hardware portability

Users might want to write a program for one piece of hardware, and later run it

> on another. RIOT should let user code be completely portable, so long as it's

Reviewer 4: Language-wise maybe: "it's valid" -> "it remains valid"?

valid with the hardware.

The hardware abstraction layer should be stable, well defined and consistent.
Above the HAL, the only thing that modules should know about hardware is

> whether a required feature is there or not. If it isn't, the module should

Reviewer 4: This seems a bit too abstract: "Required features" could be peripherals such as a sensor or actuator, but at the same time a property of the peripheral such as "precision", "speed of operation", etc. I would suggest to differentiate a bit.

Author: This is meant to suggest that the modules should only know about whether their dependencies are compiled for that hardware. Perhaps "whether its build dependencies are provided or not"?

adapt accordingly, or not compile.

## Real-time capabilities

Different real-time guarantees are required for different use cases. Low
frequency sensing needs only soft real-time support and can handle less timing
accuracy so long as the timers support long timescales. High-frequency sensing
and control applications need hard real-time guarantees and sub-millisecond
timing accuracy.

RIOT should deliver soft real-time performance by default, to cover the widest
range of use cases. Programs with hard deadlines should be achievable with more
expertise. It should provide timers which can competently handle the timescales

> of any application.

Reviewer 4: This is IMO not correct. RIOT does not provide hard real-time guarantees. Please have a look at what Matthias has worked out for the paper [4], Section V.B.

Author: I was informed by @haukepetersen IIRC that the tickless scheduler allows people to satisfy hard deadlines if they know what they're doing. Perhaps he can disambiguate?

Reviewer 4: If I'm not mistaken, the system interface does not allow to specify a deadline of a thread ... as the scheduler is not deadline-aware. So I wonder how this could be done?

Author: I've talked to Hauke who indicated that he's ok with this being taken out. I've changed what's expressed in this paragraph to represent the idea that we aspire to support high frequency sensing and control applications but this is not our primary focus. Would that accurately represent the common understanding around this topic?

Author: Paragraph now reads:

"Different real-time guarantees are required for different use cases. Low
frequency sensing needs only soft real-time support and can handle less timing
accuracy so long as the timers support long timescales. Sensing and control
applications which do not require hard real-time guarantees are also supported.

RIOT should deliver soft real-time performance by default, to cover the widest
range of use cases. It should provide timers which can competently handle the
timescales of any application."

Reviewer 3: I find that a little sad. Sensing and control applications which *do* require hard real-time guarantees are definitely doable with RIOT.

> the system interface does not allow to specify a deadline of a thread ... as the scheduler is not deadline-aware. So I wonder how this could be done?

Specifying deadlines is not necessary to actually meet them.

Usually hard real-time means that a system *never* reacts to important events too late. For that it is necessary to be able to get guaranteed upper bounds for reaction time to these events.

In RIOT this is doable with some restrictions. The key is usually interrupt latency, because once an interrupt is running, the next steps can usually be done in constant time.
In RIOT, disabling interrupts is used to guard critical sections. In an application needing hard guarantees, all places where that is done need to be analyzed in the context of the actual application.

For example, mutex blocking might disable interrupts for one linked list traversal (a list of waiting threads). That time is bounded with O(N), N being the number of threads in the system. A hard real-time deployment will (for example) not exceed a low number of threads, so mutex blocking will have a bounded interupts-disable-time. In the general case, this is more difficult, because the number of threads is not bounded.

Doing this analysis for all "interrupt disables", taking nesting into account, will yield a maximum interrupt latency. Combined with a clear understanding of hardware interrupt latencies, it can be guaranteed that an event triggered through interrupts will not take more than X cycles.

Hard real-time applications where guranteed X cycles of interrupt latency are acceptable are thus doable with RIOT. But it is difficult to claim "RIOT provides hard real-time guarantees", as it very much depends on the actual application and used hardware.

Unfortunately the same is true for soft real-time "guarantees". Take any RIOT node, hammer it with network packets and see how the responsiveness of the shell goes down. With ethernet it is easily possible to completely starve it. You might say, "that's because the network stack has a higher priority than the shell", but that is exactly the kind of expertise necessary to build a soft *or* hard real-time application with RIOT.

Author: Thanks for the detailed explanation. It seems that to imply that no hard guarantees are ever achievable would be misleading, but also that giving hard real time guarantees is not the design focus of the kernel. (correct me if I'm wrong.)  

Would it be possible to nail down exactly what guarantees we want to intentionally design the system to give, in what situations?

Reviewer 4: @danpetry as suggested: Look at the corresponding section of the paper. This was produced after lengthier discussions and reassurance on the subject.

Author: Summarising the aspects of section V.B of the paper which deal with design intentions for meeting deadlines, I've got:

The kernel's scheduler is based on O(1) operations, meaning that the time needed to switch to a different thread has an upper bound. Tasks also do not have parallel operation mimicked by regular switching upon timer ticks. This allows for deterministic, real-time system behavior, addressing tasks of various criticality, provided task priorities are configured coherently.

Taking out the requirements (not design solutions) from this, we might have

Deterministic real-time behaviour should be achievable, allowing for the support for tasks of various criticality, provided task priorites are configured coherently.

How does this sit with people.

## Interoperability

RIOT nodes need to communicate reliably with non-RIOT nodes. The protocols need

> to be familiar to them and behave in the way they expect.

Reviewer 4: This sounds confusing to me. Maybe replace by:
"RIOT nodes need to communicate reliably with non-RIOT nodes by carefully implementing open standards or identical technological specs."

RIOT should support open network protocol standards once they have reached a

> certain level of validity and popularity. It should be configurable so that

Reviewer 4: "validity" -> "maturity"

> users can choose which (optional) areas of specifications they want to include.

Reviewer 4: "areas" -> "features"

Whatever the configuration, nodes should handle all possible traffic in a
compliant manner.

## Stability

Nodes shouldn't fail because of RIOT, whatever the platform. Assuming perfect
hardware and a moderately well-written application, they should be able to run
indefinitely.

The testing and peer review processes that ensure this should be under
continuous review and refinement, including automating them where it's
possible. Error handling should guarantee stability with minimal memory usage.

## Unified APIs

Users don't want to be confused by semantic differences between APIs. RIOT

> provides a similar "look and feel" across all our APIs.

Reviewer 4: Language-wise:
"RIOT wants to ease development for users by providing a similar "look and feel" across all our APIs."

RIOT's interfaces should only differ in the ways that their modules differ.
Where possible, layers should exist that sit on top of a certain class of
modules to give an identical interface to the user. Semantic and naming
conventions should be consistent throughout the system.

## Internet security

RIOT nodes need to be resilient against cyber attacks, for the sake of its
reputation and the reputation of the IoT.

It should be hard against all the threats a node is likely to experience,
depending on the situation, including those from computers with many times
their processing power. Security should be as easy to use as possible while

> still strong. Security flaws should be patched as quickly as possible.

Reviewer 4: Please add:
"Security flaws should be patched as quickly as possible" + "by servicing a security alert channel with high priority."

Convenient updating mechanisms should allow users to apply patches to their
nodes, wherever they are.

# Acknowledgements

This document follows previous work on documenting RIOT's design priorities [3]
[4].

# References

[1] [RFC7228 Terminology for Constrained-Node Networks. C. Bormann, M. Ersue,

> A. Keranen. May 2014.](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7228) \

Reviewer 4: This reference is not cited correctly:
C. Bormann, M. Ersue, A. Keranen: "Terminology for Constrained-Node Networks.", RFC, No. 7228, RFC-Editor, May 2014.

[2] [“What Is Free Software?” _GNU Operating System_, 15 Dec. 2018,
www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.en.html.](https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.en.html) \
[3] [Emmanuel Baccelli, Oliver Hahm, Mesut Günes, Matthias Wählisch, Thomas
C.  Schmidt, "RIOT OS: Towards an OS for the Internet of Things," in
Proceedings of the 32nd IEEE International Conference on Computer
Communications (INFOCOM), Poster Session, April

> 2013.](https://www.riot-os.org/docs/riot-infocom2013-abstract.pdf) \

Reviewer 4: This reference is incomplete: 
"Poster Session, April 2013." -> "Poster, p. 79–80, IEEE Press, April 2013".

Author: Thanks, NB this was taken from the website, which should be updated

[4] [E. Baccelli, et al. 2018. RIOT: An Open Source Operating System for Low-end
Embedded Devices in the IoT. The IEEE Internet of Things Journal

> (2018).](http://ilab-pub.imp.fu-berlin.de/papers/bghkl-rosos-18-prepub.pdf)

Reviewer 4: This reference is incomplete - please also name all authors, since we are not space-constrained:
E. Baccelli, C. Gündogan, O. Hahm, P. Kietzmann, M. Lenders, H. Petersen, K. Schleiser, T.C. Schmidt, M.
Wählisch: "RIOT: an Open Source Operating System for Low-end Embedded Devices in the IoT",
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, Vol. 5, No. 6, p. 4428- 4440, IEEE, December 2018.

    flow.
  - Control various specific actuators such as motors, solenoids, or valves.
  - Collect and send data with a low latency, or at least a well synchronized
    timestamp.
  - Potentially have a very low unit cost, particularly when the networks are
    implemented in mass market products such as automobiles.
  - Potentially run control algorithms themselves.

## 2.5. Edge systems for building management and automation

Various sensing and environmental control tasks can be done by edge nodes in
buildings. The nodes need to be able to:

  - Sense temperature, light, humidity, pressure, current, etc.
  - Control temperature, light, ventilation, etc.
  - Connect to the building management system, via wired or wireless connectors.
  - Deliver data with controllable timing and accuracy.

## 2.6. Smart home devices

Easy to use devices can let consumers monitor and control their home
automatically. The devices need to be able to:

  - Sense temperature, light, humidity, smoke, etc.
  - Integrate with home appliances to control temperature, light, power usage,
    etc.
  - Be usable but secure for people with no technical knowledge.
  - Connect to a commercial home gateway.

>   - Communicate over common home IoT protocols such as ZigBee, Bluetooth, Wi-Fi,

Reviewer 6: With this sentence from section 3 in mind

> RIOT should support standards once they have reached a certain level of
maturity and popularity.

I guess it is about high time we write a ZigBee stack then ;-). Question is are we able / allowed to do that (I remember there was some paywall thingy)?

Reviewer 6: I actually was asked about this at 35C3 by @Drakulix. His use-case is to have a non-intrusive but open integration with his TRÅDFRI home automation setup.

Author: Thanks for the catch. AFAIU you can implement Zigbee but have to pay to get it certified (and call it ZigBee). In any case it seems that Zigbee isn't in line with our open philosophies. So, I could remove the ZigBee here? and make sure that it's clear throughout the doc that we support only *open* networking protocols?

Author: Zigbee removed after discussion offline

    etc.
  - Connect to the building's power or provide their own power, depending on

>     the product.

Author: This seems like a good idea to me. Unless any objections I'll merge these sections, keeping the title "Edge systems for building management and automation" and mentioning smart home in the initial paragraph of this section?

>     the product.

Author: Done

>     the product.

Author: these sections are now merged

## 2.8. Education

The broad technical scope of RIOT makes it useful as a basis for education.
This requires:

  - The presence of didactic materials related to RIOT.
  - Clear and easy to find documentation.
  - A general availability of supported hardware and tools.

# 3. Design philosophies

Below are the design philosophies that are typically followed by developers to
cater for the above use cases. The sections below include descriptions of
tradeoffs between the philosophies, and where the resolutions typically fall.

## Suitability for constrained devices

"Constrained" means that available memory, energy, and processor cycles are so
reduced as to become a dominant consideration in design requirements [1]. 

#### Energy efficiency

RIOT nodes sometimes need to last for several years without external power, so
they need to manage energy carefully. RIOT's tickless scheduler lets devices
sleep while they aren't collecting data.

Modules outside the core should leverage the benefits and address the
programming challenges of such a scheduler. They shouldn't demand that users do
the same.  They should, however, allow users to manage power through different
modes and functions.

> 

Author: These points fit more in the "design philosophies" section as they are more about internal design of RIOT rather than the use cases.  
Some aspects you've mentioned are in there already, but what currently isn't is differentiation between energy management which is "magic" (invisible) and that which is user configurable. Just to clarify, are you suggesting the following: we balance usability with energy efficiency, except on some selected platforms (Hamilton? etc) where we do indeed squeeze the last Joule out in the default configuration?

> 

Author: (see the section titled "energy efficiency")

> 

Author: Clarified the section about energy efficiency offline, with some initial thoughts. @MichelRottleuthner will think more about any further clarifications.

#### Small memory footprint

Apart from being optimized for low memory usage, RIOT tries very hard to be as
modular as possible so unused features don't use up precious RAM or flash.
Almost all features are provided as optional modules that have to be enabled
explicitly at compile time.  A minimal RIOT configuration starts at around
<2KiB flash and <1.5KiB RAM (including stack space for one thread and ISRs).

Starting from there, the memory usage depends on the enabled features:

- Non-networked control loop / sensing applications can fit on very small MCUs
(eg., an Atmega328P with 2KiB RAM)
- 6lowPAN networking currently starts at ~40KiB ROM and ~10KiB RAM
- A 6lowpan enabled CoAP server requires ~60KiB ROM and ~15KiB RAM
- a file system adds ~15 KiB ROM and ~2 KiB RAM

#### Constrained networking

> RIOT should deliver best-in-class communication robustness and

Author: the implication is that the robustness we *should* provide is at least as good as anyone else's. To generalise somewhat, there are a number of statements in this document which reflect aspirations, rather than the actual current state. Hence the frequent use of the word "should". I believe this is appropriate and gives us goals to aim towards, which is an implicit purpose of a guidance document. (Guiding our developers to keep us exactly where we are would seem to be unproductive.)
I would say the question is more like: is "robustness as good as anyone else's" a specific enough, and realistic, goal?

> RIOT should deliver best-in-class communication robustness and

Author: removed "best in class" as suggested
